release 0.22.0 (#2498)
delta-io/delta-kernel-rs: CHANGELOG.md

   - Adds `parquet_format_version: Option<String>` field to `TableProperties`. Callers using exhaustive struct construction must add `parquet_format_version: None`.
2. Robust partitioned-write APIs ([#2356])
   - Replaces the old `WriteContext` API with partition-aware variants: use `txn.partitioned_write_context(partition_values)` or `txn.unpartitioned_write_context()`. Partition values are now passed as `Map<String, Scalar>` (kernel handles serialization per the Delta spec) instead of `Map<String, String>`.
3. Add typed null literal support to FFI expression visitors ([#2375])
   - FFI `visit_expression_literal_null` and `visit_literal_null` now accept `type_tag` (plus `precision`/`scale` for decimal). FFI engines must provide type information when emitting null literals; see the new `NullTypeTag` enum for the contract.
4. Change get_create_table_builder to accept EngineSchema visitor ([#2378])
   - FFI `get_create_table_builder` now takes `&EngineSchema` instead of `Handle<SharedSchema>`. FFI callers must encode the schema via `visit_field_*` downcalls (matching the `scan_builder_with_schema` pattern) instead of going through `schema_from_json`.

> 5. Revert add WriteContext::partition_group_key ([#2403])

Reviewer: Do we need to mention this? like ... we added and removed within the same batch of commits for the same release. As far as our releases are concerned .... this was never added?

Author: Removed from breaking changes

   - Reverts `WriteContext::partition_group_key` introduced earlier in this release line. Connectors should partition data themselves (e.g. via Arrow's `partition` kernel + serialized partition values as the group key) before constructing one `WriteContext` per partition group.
6. Transform stats parsed for remove actions ([#2061])
   - Adds `fn has_field(&self, name: &ColumnName) -> bool` to the `EngineData` trait. Custom `EngineData` implementors must add this method.

> 7. Add PathMode to control relative vs absolute paths in Delta log ([#2360])

Reviewer: We deleted this

Author: Removed from breaking changes

   - Default write behavior changed: kernel now writes **relative** paths in `add.path` (e.g. `abc.parquet`) instead of absolute URLs (e.g. `s3://bucket/table/abc.parquet`), matching Delta Spark. `DefaultParquetHandler::write_parquet_file` signature changed from `(path, data, partition_values, stats_columns)` to `(data, &WriteContext)`.
8. Add tests for histograms and expose stats and histogram ([#2373])
   - Exposes `stats` and `histogram` accessors on file metadata for connector use. Most callers gain new getters.

> 9. Remove PathMode, always write relative paths ([#2410])

Reviewer: Delete

Author: Removed

    - `CheckpointWriter::finalize` now takes a `LastCheckpointHintStats` struct instead of `(FileMeta, ActionReconciliationIteratorState)`. Construct the new struct to correctly populate `_last_checkpoint` (including `sizeInBytes` and `size`) for V2 checkpoints with sidecars.
13. Replace existing metrics reporting with tracing ([#1822])
    - Removes the `MetricsReporter` trait and the metrics-reporter slot from `Engine`. Connectors register a `tracing-subscriber` layer instead. Migrate any custom `MetricsReporter` implementations to a `tracing::Layer`.
14. Add CheckpointRowGroupFilter for checkpoint data skipping ([#1893])
    - `ParquetStatsProvider::get_parquet_rowcount_stat` return type changed from `i64` to `Option<i64>`. Engines implementing `ParquetStatsProvider` must wrap their existing return in `Some(num_rows)`.

### 🚀 Features / new APIs

1. Add infrastructures for sidecar splitting support ([#2271])
2. Add`extract_primitive_scalar` utility for Arrow-to-Scalar conversion ([#2368])
3. `ParquetHandler` supports auto-creates when directory not exist ([#2287])
4. Add schema validation for CREATE TABLE ([#2309])

> 5. Add WriteContext::partition_group_key ([#2392])

Reviewer: Can delete -- we reverted this!

Author: Removed

# Changelog

## [v0.22.0](https://github.com/delta-io/delta-kernel-rs/tree/v0.22.0/) (2026-04-29)

[Full Changelog](https://github.com/delta-io/delta-kernel-rs/compare/v0.21.0...v0.22.0)

### 🏗️ Breaking changes

1. Add delta.parquet.format.version table property ([#2369])
   - Adds `parquet_format_version: Option<String>` field to `TableProperties`. Callers using
     exhaustive struct construction must add `parquet_format_version: None`.

> 2. Robust partitioned-write APIs ([#2356])

Reviewer 2: This requires quite some code change right? Can we link to say changes in our tests that show how to adjust?

Author: Yes, I added more details and also linked some examples.

Reviewer: The tracking issue had a connector upgrade guide

AFK and can't send it now

   - Replaces the old `WriteContext` API with partition-aware variants: use
     `txn.partitioned_write_context(partition_values)` or `txn.unpartitioned_write_context()`.
     Partition values are now passed as `Map<String, Scalar>` (kernel handles serialization per
     the Delta spec) instead of `Map<String, String>`.
3. Add typed null literal support to FFI expression visitors ([#2375])
   - FFI `visit_expression_literal_null` and `visit_literal_null` now accept `type_tag` (plus
     `precision`/`scale` for decimal). FFI engines must provide type information when emitting
     null literals; see the new `NullTypeTag` enum for the contract.
4. Change get_create_table_builder to accept EngineSchema visitor ([#2378])
   - FFI `get_create_table_builder` now takes `&EngineSchema` instead of `Handle<SharedSchema>`.
     FFI callers must encode the schema via `visit_field_*` downcalls (matching the

>      `scan_builder_with_schema` pattern) instead of going through `schema_from_json`.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we ever had a `schema_from_json`? I don't understand what this bullet actually means. Could we get an example, or maybe a bit more about what needs to be adjusted.

Author: good callout, that was a bad note. I did another full audit and modified some other bullets. I also referenced `ffi/examples/create-table` in the current bullet.

5. Transform stats parsed for remove actions ([#2061])
   - Adds `fn has_field(&self, name: &ColumnName) -> bool` to the `EngineData` trait. Custom
     `EngineData` implementors must add this method.
6. Default to writing relative paths in `add.path` ([#2410])
   - Kernel now writes **relative** paths in `add.path` (e.g. `abc.parquet`) instead of absolute
     URLs (e.g. `s3://bucket/table/abc.parquet`), matching Delta Spark.
     `DefaultParquetHandler::write_parquet_file` signature changed from

>      `(path, data, partition_values, stats_columns)` to `(data, &WriteContext)`.

Reviewer 2: These are two very different points. We need to split them, and I think the second one belongs with the partitioned writes stuff

Author: Split up these two points, and move the second point below the partition writes section (2). Also linked a reference to the changes.

   - Exposes `stats` and `histogram` accessors on file metadata for connector use. Most callers
     gain new getters.
8. Separate read state from effective state in Transaction ([#2385])
   - Internal `Transaction` refactor: splits the held snapshot into
     `read_snapshot_opt: Option<SnapshotRef>` (pre-commit state) and
     `effective_table_config: TableConfiguration` (state this commit will produce).
9. Make scan_table_changes_next return *mut ArrowFFIData ([#2430])
   - FFI `scan_table_changes_next` now returns `*mut ArrowFFIData` instead of
     `ExternResult<ArrowFFIData>`. FFI consumers must switch from value-style access (`res.ok`)
     to pointer-style access and call the new `free_arrow_ffi_data` on non-null results.
10. Update `CheckpointWriter::finalize` to accept `LastCheckpointHintStats` ([#2400])
    - `CheckpointWriter::finalize` now takes a `LastCheckpointHintStats` struct instead of
      `(FileMeta, ActionReconciliationIteratorState)`. Construct the new struct to correctly
      populate `_last_checkpoint` (including `sizeInBytes` and `size`) for V2 checkpoints with
      sidecars.
11. Replace existing metrics reporting with tracing ([#1822])

>     - Removes the `MetricsReporter` trait and the metrics-reporter slot from `Engine`. Connectors

Reviewer 2: This is wrong. This should be:
- `MetricsReporter` is no longer part of the `Engine` APIs. Instead you can register a reporter as a tracing layer. See the `inspect-table` example changes in the PR for an example of how to migrate.

Author: Done

   - Internal `Transaction` refactor: splits the held snapshot into
     `read_snapshot_opt: Option<SnapshotRef>` (pre-commit state) and
     `effective_table_config: TableConfiguration` (state this commit will produce).
9. Make scan_table_changes_next return *mut ArrowFFIData ([#2430])
   - The Ok variant of FFI `scan_table_changes_next`'s `ExternResult` is now a heap-allocated
     `*mut ArrowFFIData` instead of an inline `ArrowFFIData` value. FFI consumers must switch
     from value-style access (`res.ok`) to pointer-style and call the new `free_arrow_ffi_data`
     on non-null results.
10. Update `CheckpointWriter::finalize` to accept `LastCheckpointHintStats` ([#2400])
    - `CheckpointWriter::finalize` now takes a `LastCheckpointHintStats` struct instead of
      `(FileMeta, ActionReconciliationIteratorState)`. Construct the new struct to correctly
      populate `_last_checkpoint` (including `sizeInBytes` and `size`) for V2 checkpoints with
      sidecars.
11. Replace existing metrics reporting with tracing ([#1822])
    - `MetricsReporter` is no longer part of the `Engine` APIs. Instead you can register a

>       reporter as a tracing layer. See `kernel/examples/inspect-table` for migration.

Reviewer 2: I think we should call out that inspect-table can give an example of how to migrate, not that it's a migration guide or something :)

```suggestion
      reporter as a tracing layer. See `kernel/examples/inspect-table` for an example
      of how to migrate.
```

Author: Done, thanks!
